Yeah.
Okay.
Excellent. We're now in public session hearing submissions
on the Drug Overdose
Assistance Protection Legislation Bill.
Hopefully, we have our first submitter, which is Ashburton Community
Alcohol and Drug Service.
Just trying to get that
for us.
Excellent.
Do believe they're just coming online.
Steph, welcome to the Health Select Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this session. We have a number of committee members around
the room. We have allocated 10 minutes for
your submission. Before you start, I will just remind you that the
rules of Parliament mean that when we're hearing your submission, we have to
be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage a person's
reputation. If you're concerned that you are going to make serious allegations or
disclose sensitive information about yourself or others, we will
ask you to move to your next point. Generally, please do not name
other people, make serious allegations against named or identifiable
people, include specific or detailed information about
circumstances of an overdose. Any personal
experience is important to us and will help us assist in making
recommendations to improve the bill.
But we do just ask you keep those points in mind.
So with that, I'll hand the time over to you now.
Kia ora, good morning. Thank you for having me here this morning.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Stephanie Paul toku ingoa.
I'm appearing today on behalf of Ashburton Community Alcohol and Drug Service,
or ACADS, in support of the Drug Overdose Assistance Protection
Legislation Bill. Thank you for hearing our oral submission today.
I will take our written submission as read.
Mid-Canterbury, where ACADS is based, is a predominantly rural
district. Our community members often live in geographically
isolated farms and locations, in small townships, and
across the district where the nearest emergency department is over an
hour away.
In our community, when someone needs life-saving medical attention as the
result of a drug overdose, ambulance response times are longer because
of our location, and we consider that any time spent questioning
the decision to call for help is too long.
Since 1988, there has been an over 13-fold
increase in the number of accidental drug overdoses, and the
population rate of fatal drug overdoses among Maori is
now twice as high as non-Maori.
Our written submission notes that nearly 40% of people at risk of drug harm
would hesitate to call 111 if someone was experiencing
an adverse drug reaction.
In Canada, over a third of bystanders at an overdose event
cited fear of police involvement as the reason they didn't call an emergency
service.
As an earlier submitter on this bill has said, the danger is not only the
overdose itself, the danger is the hesitation, uncertainty,
and fear of police involvement that stops people from seeking help.
Evidence published by the Public Health Communication Centre, New Zealand
in February of this year provides a strong rationale for
replacing current legislation with a health-centered framework that
prioritizes harm reduction and equity in alignment with
Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
In 2024, the Ministry of Health stated that New Zealand
takes a health-based approach to substance use, with a focus
on reducing the associated harms.
Drug overdose is a health issue, not a criminal one.
Good Samaritan protections work.
Following the introduction of equivalent laws in the United States,
research published in the Journal of Law and Economics found a 10% to
15% reduction in opioid overdose deaths.
The evidence consistently shows us that these laws do
not increase drug use, they increase survival of a
drug overdose.
Applied to the context in Aotearoa, a 10% to 15%
reduction in overdose deaths would translate between 19 and
28 people per year saved. 19 to
28 lives a year that could be saved by the introduction of
this bill. Our written submission asks this committee to
consider how the protections in this bill can be communicated
clearly to the communities most at risk, and we would like to emphasize
the need to support community organizations already working with at-risk
communities to build trust in the system change and with the wider
community to understand it.
Accidental overdose deaths are preventable.
Three people a week in Aotearoa die as the result of
one, and the fear of legal consequences is a documented,
measurable barrier to people calling for help.
This bill would remove that barrier.
ACADS urges the committee to recommend that this bill proceeds.
I'm happy to take any questions. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you. And Jenny, did I see your hand go up?
Jenny.
Yes. Thank you very much, Steph, for your submission
today. Just wanting to
clarify that the statistics that you
have put in both your written submission and what you spoke to this morning, they
are national figures?
Uh-
Not Ashburton-wide figures
... yeah. So some are national, and then there's a couple that are from the
Canada context, which is similar community to
Aotearoa.
Can you
just give us a bit more on what you're seeing locally in your community?
So we can understand that regional impact?
Yeah. It's really tricky here. So Ashburton,
for example, we have what's called an acute admissions unit at our
hospital, so we don't have an emergency department here.
So if somebody was to be experiencing a drug overdose, the nearest
emergency department is Timaru District Hospital.
However, the likelihood that you would stay there is--
potentially you would be transported to Christchurch Hospital anyway,
which again is another hour and a half away from here.
And so we consider that any time somebody is
questioning whether or not to ring an emergency service is too long,
because you're already over an hour away from the medical attention that
somebody might need. And our ambulance services, they do a
fantastic job.
But it is a longer wait time by design just
because of our geographical location.
And do you have-
Excellent.
Sorry. Can I have one more sup or are we done for time?
No. A quick one.
A quick one. Do you have any idea of numbers over the course, say in a year,
that might need that service, like getting off to the ED for overdose?
Yeah, again, it's a little bit tricky.
I have an Official Information Act request sitting with Health
New Zealand at the moment, because the tricky thing is trying
to gather information that's specific to a rural district when most of those
cases would end up at a different location.
And so the data tracking is really difficult to kind of get that more specific
picture for our rural communities.
But I can ask our Hatahonu St John volunteers as
well. Again, it can be a little bit of a privacy issue, but I can definitely see if
they can give me some kind of more informal kind of information and send that
through to you.
Okay. Cameron.
Thank you. I just had a quick question about opioid deaths in your area.
How many sort of opioid-related deaths do you have
versus other drugs?
Again, it's a little bit tricky to speak to specifics, not because
of our community, but because of the way that the data is collected,
and it's in a broader context. But there are three people
in New Zealand that die every week as the result of a drug overdose,
and I don't have the more specific-
That's fine. That's okay
... statistics for opioid overdose, but I can again look into that and send it
through to you.
No, that's fine. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much, Steph. That was a very clear presentation.
I appreciate you taking the time for both the written and oral submission.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
We'll now move on to Max Marshall, who is in the room.
Max.
I've got some notes I wanted to
distribute.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Max, you have been in the room, and you have heard what I said
about natural justice.
Yes.
So we will be just mindful of what's said in submission.
Okay.
So we've given you five minutes, so I'll hand that time over to you now.
Good morning. Thank you for allowing me to speak today.
I take my submission as read.
As a mental health advocate, I am
remarkably familiar, as you would be too, with
cases of residents living in social housing struggling with the effects of
drug and alcohol abuse. There have been recent news stories
following people
who have died from alcohol and drug-related deaths in the
care of a housing provider.
These NGOs have held contracts for providing these
services to the government,
the state. There would be no reason for
media coverage of one story of a
client who died in social and transitional housing in
2022 in a death that was associated to
heavy drug addiction had it not been for
a point of interest in the person's historical
notoriety.
For the past three years, this has been an issue I've taken up with
organizations providing accommodation or emergency accommodation.
In the provision of care by such organizations, there needs to be a duty of
care. It has been my observation, in my
experience with community housing providers, this has not been a
responsibility that they have been willing to take.
In the case of a person who died in the care of a social housing
provider, a higher standard must be applied.
It is then ironic there are many residents whose medical
history of addiction was part of the criteria for them
receiving housing. Magnus O'Neill tells me
that there are over 300 questions that form part of the
assessment under the social housing system, which aids at
ensuring that the housing availability is suitable for the
particular needs and requirements of the client.
For them to be able to access transitional housing in the first place, and
in this case, it makes sense for the community housing
provider
to be held accountable. Robert Buchanan writes that a
collaborative approach on its own does not ensure either transparency or
accountability. The growth of the NGO service delivery has
been at the expense of some transparency,
especially over where boundaries between public and private sectors
cross. The housing community provider may not be the state,
but the state, as principle, means we should have the power to dictate terms for
the housing provider to meet, and for these to include a duty of
care.
What I'm asking is not impossible.
If a person was living on the street taking drugs and perished on the street
from an overdose, I agree we're not justified
in the belief that we are expecting anyone to be- Be
responsible. It makes no sense to not make community
housing and transitional housing providers accountable for
deaths relating to drug overdoses.
And while I realize that alcoholism and drug use is a cunning and
baffling illness, it is the attitude of these
housing providers wanting to evade
responsibility which I challenge.
The belief that
while they want to take the full advantage of funding attached to their client,
there is none of that
liability uptake.
Excellent. Thank you, Max. Does anybody have any
questions? Cameron.
Just a quick question, Max. In the original
submission, in your last sort of sentence-
Mm
... paragraph. This bill would allow NGO contractors
to escape prosecution for breach of duty of care of all the contracts
in the event of a death of one of their charge.
What would be the prosecution that they would
otherwise be under with this bill?
I thought
about this question too when I had a look, and I think you
could open--
I didn't want to say that in my oral submission because I wrote that separately
for my written submission, but you could make them
civilly liable
instead. That would be my attempt at the
answer.
There's not currently a prosecution path or a civil liability
path, but you're advocating there should be one.
Yeah, there should be, yeah, for families and that. Yeah.
Excellent. We've reached time, so thank you, Max, and thank you for taking the time
to come and present to us in person. We do appreciate it.
We now will move on to the next submission, which is Harm Reduction Coalition
Aotearoa, who I do believe is online.
Dr Kirsten Gibson, who is the chair of the Harm Reduction
Coalition Aotearoa.
Excellent. Welcome, Dr Gibson. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing the session of the Health Select Committee.
I'm not sure whether you've been online, but I do just need to remind submitters
that rules of Parliament mean that when we're hearing your submission, we need to
be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage a
person's reputation. If we are concerned that there's going to be serious
allegations or disclosure of sensitive information about
yourself or others, we will ask you to move on to your next point.
So bearing that in mind, we've allocated 10 minutes for your
submission. I'll hand that time over to you now.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you.
And thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
So as you noted, my name is Kirsten Gibson, and I'm the current chair of
Harm Reduction Coalition Aotearoa.
We're a nonprofit organization, and we're all voluntary.
And one of the aspects of our organization is to seek
evidence-based drug policies that promote harm reduction
and protect human rights.
I watched the oral submissions last week for this bill, and I was humbled and in
awe of the passion, knowledge, care, and just good sense of those who spoke in
support of the bill, as well as the two speakers just before me.
I take it as our submission is read, so I won't repeat everything that
was in our written submission. However, there are some elements I would
like to reiterate.
When we were putting together our written submission for this bill, we had several
members of our coalition share their personal stories of being
around overdose. I've gained consent from two members to
share their stories this morning, and they speak to these in the written
submission.
So one of them, Adam, who really wanted to be here this morning and speak
to his stories, but he was unable to get the time off work.
He's a respected member of our committee and brings with him important insight,
knowledge, and lived experience of the issues that are at the core of
this proposed bill. And as I said, he was really keen to
share his relevant personal experiences.
Adam has lived in Australia for a significant part of his life, and he
shared some stories from that time.
He said, "I remember living in Sydney where a Good Samaritan law
exists. When someone was in trouble, we didn't have to hesitate
or worry about police action. We just immediately called the
ambulance."
He also said, "I've been there when many people have overdosed.
The ambulance would come, and they'd be Narcanned," that's provided naloxone or
something similar,
"and people live to fight another day.
I remember one particular time when we'd gone somewhere to buy drugs, and there
was a couple who had both dropped. They were overdosing.
My mate and I called for an ambulance and did what we could for both people
until the ambulance came, and the couple were both all good, and they
lived. Living in Sydney, I never feared to ring an ambulance
when needed. I had no idea that there isn't a Good Samaritan bill in New
Zealand. I was shocked when I found out
because it just does not make sense on any level.
It's ridiculous if you're too scared to ring an ambulance and someone's
dying. Had I and other people in Australia not been able to call for an
ambulance when someone was dying, we wouldn't be here today."
Another member of our coalition
who shared his story and also gave me permission to speak today is Murray.
He has both lived and academic knowledge and experience in all the issues
in this bill.
Murray told me that too many people he knows have died from avoidable
overdoses. And as I said, he also gave me his consent to read out
one of his stories where not having a Good Samaritan bill
in Aotearoa led to someone dying. Murray
said, "I've experienced a situation where someone overdosed at
home. Because of panic regarding a potential police response,
the delay in calling medical services tragically resulted in their death.
If fear wasn't in the room, they would still be here."
So just having shared Marie and Adam's stories, I'd just
like to acknowledge the courage that I think they both have in sharing that and
allowing me to then share it with you.
Back here in Aotearoa, New Zealand, after Adam and
Marie's stories, unfortunately, we've just had a very timely reminder
over the last week about the importance and need of harm reduction.
The Wellington area has experienced a number of overdoses, which have
been reported in the media.
These are people's lives.
It's clear from the evidence and many of the submissions that you will have read
and heard so far that being able to call for help when someone is
overdosing saves lives and reduces harm.
The fear of calling for emergency help and being prosecuted causes
people to delay or not call for help at all.
And as the first speaker spoke this morning about what that can do in rural
areas,
quite simply results in death.
So we don't want people to die.
Harm Reduction Coalition Aotearoa don't want people to die,
and I'm sure none of the decision-makers voting on this bill want people
dying. Harm Reduction Coalition Aotearoa strongly supports
this bill. I welcome any questions.
Excellent. Cameron.
Thank you, Chair. Just have a question, Kirsten, about
your recommendation of expanding Narcan alone
accessibility.
In 2023, it was expanded through the needle exchange
program. I'm sure you're aware of all this.
But how much further, how would
a committee, how would anybody expand it further?
What's your recommendation around who should be getting more access to Narcan alone
and Narcan and Narcoide, I think, is that the one we've got?
Yeah. Well, all the iterations.
Yeah.
Yeah. I guess speaking
from my opinion,
any accessibility or any improvement in accessibility
is good and saves lives.
From my knowledge, we currently have approval
to
distribute through limited means, as you mentioned, say like needle
exchange, but it's only the injectable,
because the spray
version is
not--
I don't believe it's been approved in New Zealand.
So basically, I just think any
increase in availability for something like naloxone, Narcan,
et cetera, would be a massive improvement in looking at overdose rates
and saving people's lives.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you very much, Kirsten, for your submission.
Really do appreciate the time taken for both your written and oral submission.
We now will move on to our next submitters, which is the
Salvation Army. And I do believe we have Lieutenant
Colonel Ian Hudson and Lieutenant Colonel
Lynette Hudson.
I'd like to welcome you both to the Health Select Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this session. Because we are dealing with
sensitive matters, I do just need to remind our submitters that the rules
of Parliament mean that when we're hearing your submission, we have to be
careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage a person's
reputation. If we are concerned that you're going to make serious allegations or
disclose sensitive information about yourself or others, we will ask you to
move to your next point. Bearing with that in mind, I'll hand
over to you. We've given you 10 minutes for your submission.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to speak this
morning. And I want to start with a quote that I heard
many years ago, and I've never been able to quite track where it came from.
But it said that alcohol and drug use is an
enduring feature of human existence and experience.
So whether we like it or not, people are drawn to
trying drugs and to using alcohol, which of course is
the most harmful legal drug that we have.
So
it also seems ironic that as we sit here to present
today,
there has been an incident over the weekend where somebody's actually
died of a drug overdose. So I think
we couldn't have engineered it into a more confronting way to
have this in front of us today. And of course, not just
that the one person
died from a drug overdose, but that others were hospitalized, taking
up hospital beds,
and requiring significant medical intervention.
I think it's also confronting to hear that three people a week die because
this is a very under-the-radar issue frequently,
and we don't-- I've worked in this sector for
most of my working career within the Salvation Army, and yet I
didn't know the numbers, and so I find that
was quite confronting. The other
thing that we would say is that from our experience in working in this
sector, many people experiment
with drugs at a time in their life, often in the younger years, but
not always. And so many people
have used drugs at one time or other in their lives,
maybe once, maybe on a regular occasion over a period of years.
Of course, we tend to deal with the very
hard end where people are experiencing significant damage through to the
point of addiction. So
that brings me to the next point, which is that our focus is on
reducing harm.
Now, if we can't prevent human behavior,
then how can we help people move through these times in their lives?
And how can we help people who find themselves
in
deep trouble, really addicted to substances?
We have,
on a daily basis, people coming through our services who have been in this
position, who have had an overdose experience.
And as the previous people mentioned, they came through
that time. Others don't. And
so it's not a particular segment of
society. This is an issue experienced across all levels of
society. So,
we wouldn't want it to be
stigmatized any further. And I think that is one of the issues
that we are hearing, is that, well, those people
deserve what comes to them because they've used
drugs.
Actually, it's a very common experience,
unfortunately, and I think we have to just understand that.
And so make sure that we don't stigmatize this issue,
but that we provide health. Because many of the people who take overdoses
are very valuable. In fact, everybody is a valuable member of the
community and makes a contribution.
So if this happens at one period in their life, we do not
want them stigmatized and
excluded from society any further.
So reducing harm is our focus.
Yes. So I guess you could gather from that, that we support the bill,
strongly support it. There's certain aspects of it,
particularly thinking of people
in a crisis moment,
trying to figure out whether they should be calling
anybody, not whether the police should be involved even.
It's like, what is this?
Most people will not be experts in figuring out if
this is a
dangerous thing that's happening or just a
bad trip or whatever you want to call it.
I know myself, having worked years ago in the '70s in
a detox, and just learning, and trying to figure
out. I was told to look after and call up for help if somebody
looked sick. Well, they all looked sick.
And I didn't know how sick was sick.
And
the people in those fields will not know
where the
level is. And because there's so many different drugs these days, and they all
probably have different kind of impacts.
Here they are trying to make a decision in the moment, should they seek help
or not?
Not sure. And then with any doubt at
all about whether there's going to be some kind of criminal
consequences to that,
I think it puts a weight against making that decision.
And there are, with the people that we've worked with, we've seen people who
are reluctant to seek help in health
situations. We ran
a clinic, a one-off,
for people from gang whanau,
and
many of them really sick.
One had to go straight to hospital.
Because they don't access healthcare, there's a
certain feeling of being marginalized of outside
of that. And the same with the police.
One particular woman that I was hearing from
once
spoke about the extreme violence that she was
experiencing,
and that the last people she would contact
would be the police. Even though the police
would've been the one that most likely could've helped her or protected her.
All of those things put together,
to me,
is what this bill is about. You add on top of that young people, that
Lynette was talking about, who
won't want to come
be outed, and have a criminal record or anything
like that.
And we do respect the fact that the police, by and large,
they're using their discretion,
but we need to make the law clear
so that
it's black and white. It's backing up what practice is actually
happening now,
and that's why we strongly support the bill going
ahead
as it's written. Yeah.
Excellent. Thank you very much. We do have two questions, and we'll go to Carlos,
then Aisha. Carlos.
Yes.
Thank you for coming. So when you talk about focus on prevention,
do you think people actually enable the premises for low-level
drugs offending should be protected against
prosecution?
Because that probably will allow people to let their friends to use their premises
to take drugs.
So could you just say that again? Sorry.
This bill will actually try to protect people, if you
qualify some medical help, from being prosecuted.
But how about those people actually enabling their premises for
low-level drugs offending should be protected from prosecute as
well?
Well, I think some of that is about social sharing, and
what you understand that people do
that. And
I think the idea of this bill is to recognize that it's not
commercial, it's not high scale, it's a
social engagement which a lot of people get involved with.
As long as it doesn't get beyond that.
And I think the bill does try to clarify where those boundaries
are, and it's not a nice
tidy thing, but I think it's quite
a good
boundary that they put around it Because there is a line where it
drifts into being commercial, to being proper
drug dealing and all that sort of thing.
Yeah. Excellent. Thank you. We'll move to Aisha.
Thanks for the work you do.
Can we just clarify that? Because I think what you just said
is different from the written submission,
where you say,
"The inclusion of protections for possession and personal drug use is clearly
aligned with the bill's objectives.
However, some of the additional offenses covered raise more complex questions
of scope, in particular, the inclusion of supply and administration
offenses, as well as offenses relating to the use of premises, vehicles, small
scale cultivation," and that is beyond the immediate
objectives of the bill. So on those things about--
because this is one of the tough decisions the committee has to make, do you think
including small scale cultivation in the bill
helps push the bill's objectives,
or is it outside what is necessary for
creating an incentive for people to report, making it okay for people
to seek help at the time of overdose?
That is kind of one of those, where do you draw the line?
And I
don't think we feel strongly against that, but we
can also see where the line, where it drifts
out is. But I think that line is
okay. Yeah.
Excellent. Thank you very much. We're right at time, so thank you very
much-
Thank you
... for taking the time to come in and present to us today.
We now will move to our next submitter, which is Alcohol Healthwatch,
and I do believe we have Andrew Galloway online.
Andrew, welcome to the Health Select Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing the session. Because we are dealing with sensitive
matters, I am reminding submitters that the rules of Parliament
mean that when we're hearing your submission, we have to be careful not to hear
allegations that may seriously damage a person's reputation.
If we are concerned that you're going to make serious allegations or disclose
sensitive information about yourself or others, we will ask you to move to your
next point. With that in mind, we have
allocated 10 minutes for your submission.
I'll hand that 10 minutes to you now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, committee, for the opportunity to address you
on this important matter. Ko Andrew Galloway toku ingoa.
My name is Andrew Galloway. I'm the Executive Director here at Alcohol Healthwatch.
We're a national charity working towards a vision of Aotearoa New Zealand free
from alcohol harm, and we've been around over 30 years.
Our services include providing evidence-based information and
advice on public policy and working with a range of people and
organizations towards fairer, more equitable environments that support
communities' health and wellbeing.
In short, we support the Drug Overdose Assistance Protection Legislation
Bill. Preventing avoidable overdose deaths and drug related harm are
important health priorities.
The burden of drug harm continues to be evident in Aotearoa New Zealand, where
accidental drug overdose resulted in 1,295 deaths
between 2016 and '24, and 148
deaths in '24.
Our submission notes that access to medical care is one of the most effective
interventions available during an overdose event.
Experience from Aotearoa New Zealand and overseas demonstrates that the fear of
legal consequences can discourage people from contacting emergency services,
even when a person's life is at risk.
I've personally witnessed this myself, having a career over 16
years as a first responder.
The bill addresses this well-recognized barrier by providing limited legal
protections for people experiencing an overdose, and those who
seek emergency assistance in good faith, and those who remain at the scene to
provide support. Importantly, they apply to low-level offenses and do not
provide immunity for serious criminal activity.
Therefore, Alcohol Healthwatch considers the bill adopts a practical
evidence-based public health approach to
prevent the preventable morbidity and mortality associated with
overdose.
We work very closely with our friends at the New Zealand Drug Foundation, and we
support their points, including protections against warrantless arrests to
be explicit in the bill. Research shows that this is a factor in ensuring such laws
are effective.
Removing ambiguity about protections for people at the scene.
The bill currently states that people at the scene must be offered support or
assistance to be covered by these protections.
We want this requirement to be removed so that people who are incidentally at the
scene are also protected.
Cover overdoses with substances controlled outside of the Misuse of Drugs Act.
Currently, the wording is controlled drugs,
which means substances regulated by Misuse of Drugs Act.
We want the wording to specify that it would include substances covered by the
Psychoactive Substances Act, the Medicines Act,
and remove the ability to arrest or prosecute for associated offenses from
these two acts, and strengthening the provisions regarding social
sharing. We also note the New Zealand Law Society's excellent submission, which
calls for clarification of the good faith requirement, noting that this needs
work or simply to be removed. Like the Law Society says, it's hard to fathom why
somebody would call emergency services in the case of a potential overdose
without good faith. And the Law Society call for this matter to be
sought advice on, and we agree. The Drug Foundation's report on
overdoses in Aotearoa New Zealand 2025 noted that
alcohol features in many overdose cases, particularly those where
one substance is detected. Alcohol adds to the risk of
overdose death, particularly when it's mixed with other depressant drugs such as
opioids, benzodiazepine, or synthetic cannabinoids.
Between 2016 and 2024, alcohol was involved in at least
43% of overdose cases. 43%.
Alcohol is Aotearoa New Zealand's most harmful drug
If we're going to make positive changes to the regulatory rules around alcohol,
they should be towards further restricting it in line with World Health
Organization advice.
I appreciate that you are the Health Select Committee, and we encourage you to take
an interest in a slightly wider matter.
We urge members to apply lateral pressure on your Justice Select Committee
colleagues and fellow parliamentarians.
The bill that's currently before the Justice Select Committee looks to relax many
of the rules around alcohol in the guise of red tape reduction.
This, in my opinion, would be reckless.
Alcohol is New Zealand's most harmful drug. I repeat that.
It features in the government policy statement on health, noting it's one of five
modifiable risk factors that can be modified to reduce the high burden of harm.
In a related matter, we've also seen the government's Suicide Prevention Action
Plan launched last year, which aims to have a
five-year whole of government approach to
preventing suicide. This plan appropriately notes the clear evidence and the
role of alcohol in suicide and self-harm,
and recent New Zealand evidence that highlights an association between alcohol
outlet density and self-harm. The plan recommends an action to means
restriction, and I quote from the plan, "More needs to be done to restrict
access to means, particularly in relation to alcohol."
To have this wrong government policy on the one hand, and on the other hand be
making alcohol more available seems nonsensical to me.
Any reduction in the availability of alcohol, increasing the price, reducing the
high level of unshackled marketing and promotion and advertising of this most
harmful drug should be a government priority.
To do less will cost lives, health outcomes, and harm more people.
Thank you, committee, for the opportunity to present, and I'm happy to take any-
Excellent. Thank you, Andrew, and we have a question
from Arena Williams.
Kia ora, Andrew.
Kia ora.
I didn't know you were a first responder.
Can you just give the committee a sense of what it is like responding in
an alcohol overdose, alcohol poisoning event, and
a drug
overdose event? And we've had some specific
questions to submitters around things like first responders in New Zealand carrying
naloxone. What is the impact on
carrying those kind of
life-saving medicines versus not having access to that kit?
I think having access to drugs like naloxone for anyone
is beneficial. It can be provided in a case where it is
not an overdose and be relatively harmless.
My experience as a first responder was over 16 years as
a responder in the New Zealand Fire Service.
So we did occasionally do medical co-response, but most of the time
attend motor vehicle crashes or indeed fires.
One incident I recall was at a dance party where
we happened to be in the neighborhood in our uniform with the
vehicle very brightly marked with fire service livery.
So people carried this gentleman across to us who I
understand had taken GHB, and they were
particularly concerned not to go near the ambulance, who was parked near
a police unit,
for fear of getting in trouble for having GHB.
Ultimately, what we know is the law as it stands
prevents people from seeking help, and we need people to be seeking help without
fear of reproach.
Excellent. Thank you very much, Andrew.
Appreciate the time taken for both your written and oral submission, so
thank you very much.
Kia ora.
We now will move to our next submitter, which is Community Action on
Youth and Drugs, Tāmaki Makaurau,
and we have Danny Kitterer with us.
Danny, welcome to the Health Select Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this session.
Just because we are dealing with sensitive matters, I am reminding all submitters
that the rules of Parliament mean that when we're hearing your submission, we have
to be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage a person's
reputation. If we are concerned that you are going to make serious allegations or
disclose sensitive information about yourself or others, we will ask you to
move to your next point. With that in mind, we have allocated
10 minutes for your submission. I'll hand that time over to you now.
Awesome. Thank you very much. Well, yeah, ata mārie.
Kia ora koutou, Chair, and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Danny Kitterer, and I'm speaking on behalf of Community Action on Youth
and Drugs, also known as CAD, here in Tāmaki Makaurau.
CAD is a Te Whatu Ora-funded public health contract.
We work alongside communities across Auckland to reduce
alcohol and other drug harm through prevention, harm reduction, and
systems change. In doing so, we regularly engage with
Rangatahi, Whanau, outreach providers, and communities
experiencing the impacts of substance-related harm.
We strongly support this legislation, and I'm here to talk about why.
At its core, this bill asks a simple but critical question: What matters
most in an overdose emergency? From our perspective, the answer is clear.
It's about preserving life. Because in those moments, people are not
making abstract legal decisions.
They're trying to work out what to do when someone is unconscious,
unresponsive, or dying in front of them.
And we know that fear can delay action.
Fear of police, fear of charges, fear of breaching bail or
parole conditions, and fear of what happens if you stay at the
scene. Even a short delay in calling 111 can be the difference between
life and death.
This bill will be particularly important for communities who already face multiple
barriers in engaging with emergency services, including
Rangatahi, Maori, and Pacifica people, and people experiencing
homelessness.
For these communities, trust in systems has often been broken many times
over. Reducing barriers at the point of crisis is therefore
critical Off the Record is a kaupapa that CAD works on that
provides a welcoming, low-barrier space where people who use
drugs, many of whom are experiencing homelessness, can access harm
reduction resources and information, drug checking, and
connect with services and support if needed.
Through this work, we've seen the importance of creating stigma-free
environments where people feel safe to ask questions, seek support,
and engage with services without fear of judgment.
This bill reflects that same principle.
In this space, we have also heard time and time again stories of people having
lost trust in our systems, our police and wider justice system,
our health system, and many more. So it is very clear that for
this population, that distrust is real, and this bill will be a
small help in rebuilding that trust.
One provision we want to highlight today is the protection relating to social
supply or sharing of small amounts of drugs in the context of an overdose
emergency. In practice, many overdose events occur in social
settings among friends, partners, or peers where substances have
been shared. In those situations, the person most likely to recognize
that something is wrong and call for help may also be the person who
shared the substance. Without protections, there is a real risk that
person hesitates or worse, leaves the scene because they fear criminal
consequences. This provision is important because it aligns the
law more closely with reality. In an emergency, we want the
person closest to the situation to act immediately to save a life.
As a youth-focused kaupapa, CAD Tāmaki Makaurau also believes this bill is
important because of the message it sends to young people.
If we want a future where rangatahi thrive, where they understand the
harms associated with alcohol and other drugs, where they feel able to ask
for help when something goes wrong, and where they trust that seeking help
is the right thing to do, we have to create policies that reinforce
those values.
For too long, responses to alcohol and other drugs have relied heavily on
criminalization. While criminal law has an important role in responding to
serious offending, we also know that criminalization alone has not
prevented and often exacerbates drug harm and risk of
overdose.
This bill is a small but meaningful step towards a different approach.
It tells young people that when someone's life is at risk, preserving that life
comes before punishment. That is a message worth
embedding in our laws. Finally, we encourage the committee to
think carefully about implementation.
Passing this bill is an important first step, but legislation alone will not
change behavior if people don't know these protections exist or don't
trust that they will work in practice.
The success of this bill will depend on how it is communicated and implemented.
That means working alongside communities such as young people, Maori and Pacifica,
people with lived and living experience of drugs, and the organizations that
already support them. These are the people who understand the barriers
to seeking help and who are best placed to help shape messages that people will
trust in a crisis. While this bill removes an important legal
barrier to seeking emergency assistance, it is also important to
recognize that legal reform alone will not remove every barrier people
face.
We know that coordinated approaches across health, justice, and
community sectors are far more effective than any one intervention
in isolation.
Previous negative experiences within the health system, particularly in
emergency departments, can also discourage people from
seeking help or engaging with care
during emergencies. To realize the full potential of this bill,
implementation should be accompanied by a coordinated health response
that ensures people experiencing alcohol and other drug harm are treated with
dignity, respect, and compassion.
This includes strengthening the support available within emergency
departments and improving pathways into ongoing care.
If we can achieve both, this bill has the potential not only to save lives during
overdose events, but also to strengthen trust in systems that
exist to support people. Thank you very much for your time.
I am happy to answer any questions.
Excellent. Thank you, Danny. Or Ghana Lynn.
Tena koe, Danny. Nga mihi atu ana ki a koutou CAD.
CAD must be nearly 30 years, I think, in delivery.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
And a great fan of the kaupapa from Tai Tokerau, but know you've
been doing mahi for a really long time.
Wanted to talk about implementation.
Mm.
And particularly from a health promotion public health perspective, what
would
your recommendations in terms of reaching community look like to ensure
that both the health sector and those in the community knew that the bill was in
place and that type of campaign of education could
look like?
Yeah, great question. Thank you very much.
And yeah, I think it would be important first of all
to work closely with the organizations
and the community leaders and the people who have those
close relationships with our communities.
And there will be different ways that we need to
build this messaging for different populations and to reach everyone.
When we're thinking of rangatahi, we really need to ensure that
that engagement, that we understand
how that message will reach them and work
with them to draft that. So in terms of,
I guess the term that often gets
used is
building that co-design, building that together, which is
really important. And so I would first go to those organizations that have those
relationships.
But that process, that being that way implementation is
with community at the table. Yeah, rangatahi, Maori and
Pacifica communities, our homeless communities, the communities
where this is a reality and more closely-
Kind of
where they experience the harms.
Excellent. Thank you. Move to Carlos.
Just a very quick one. Just now you say that facing a legal
consequence is not the best solution.
How about we add a clause on this legislation to
refer them to a social service like yours, or service
provider like yours, to have some kind of educational program
or rehabilitation program? Do you think it's a good idea?
Yeah. In theory, definitely ensuring that
people get connected to services.
But how you do that, I
guess
is really important because I think the point here as well is that the
trust isn't always there. And so people really need
to be in a place of trusting that
the systems they're engaging with actually kind of
have their best interests in heart and are going to connect them with services
that will actually help them. And that kind of isn't necessarily the
reality for a lot of people. So I think, of course,
making sure that people get connected to services, but asking
ourselves whether we have what
that process looks like and whether people
will be trusting. And that's why the coordinated
approach with the wider health system is really important, both in
departments as you said. Yeah. Where people
can get both mental health, wellbeing support, it would be really important.
Excellent. Thank you, Danny. We are at time.
So do appreciate the efforts you've put in both in your written and oral
submission. We really do appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Excellent, team. We will be suspending now until 1:00 p.m.
or five minutes after the House suspends, whichever is late.
Kia ora. Who brought the coffee? Debbie.
Uh, perhaps-
Debbie's on duty.
Okay. Please.
Debbie ain't here. No. But Debbie provides a really good morning tea.
No.
And we appreciate that